MINISTRY OF LABOUR
THE MINES RULES, 1955
1 SRO. 1421 dated 2nd July, 1955 – In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 58 of the Mines Act,
1952 (35 of 1952), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules the same having been
previously published as required by sub-section (1) of Section 59 of the Act, namely:
CHAPTER - I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and applications :- (1) These rules may be called the Mines Rules, 1955.
(2) Except as otherwise expressly provided, the rules shall apply to every mine of whatever
description to which the Act applies.
2. Definitions _ In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context -
a) “the Act” means the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952):
b) “court of inquiry” means a court of inquiry appointed under section 24 of the Act;
c) “Form” means a form as given in the First Schedule;
d) “Section” means a section of the Act:
e) “Schedule” means a schedule appended to these rules;
f) “Manager” includes Mine Superintendent who is appointed by the owner or agent of a mine under
section 17 of the Act and as such, responsible for the control, management, supervision and direction of
a mine;
g) “Certifying surgeon” means a qualified medical practitioner ppointed to be a certifying surgeon under
section II;
2[ * * * * * ]
1. Published in the Gazette of India, 1955, Part II, Section 3, Page 1172
2. Omitted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965
1[(h)]“Calendar year” means a year from the first day of January to the thirty-first day of December;
2[(i)] “Officer in-charge Canteen” means the person (other than the manager) whom the owner or agent may
appoint for securing compliance with the provisions in respect of canteens.
3[(j)] “Ordinary employed” with reference to any mine or part thereof, means the average number of
persons employed per day in the mine or part of mine during the preceding 4[calendar year] (obtained
by dividing the number of man days worked by the number of working days excluding rest days and
other non-working days)
5[(k)]
CHAPTER - II
6[COMMITTEE]
6[3. Term of office - The term of office of the members referred to in clause (c), (d) and (e) of sub section
(1) of section 12 of the Act, shall be three years from the date on which their appointment is notified in the
official Gazette:
Provided that a member shall notwithstanding the expiry of a period of three years, continue to
hold office until the appointment of his successor is notified in the Official Gazette;
Provided further that a member appointed to fill a casual vacancy shall hold office for the
remaining period of the term of office of the member in whose place he is appointed and shall continue to
hold office on the expiry of the term of office until the appointment of his successor is notified in the
Official Gazette.”]

7[4. Secretary of the Committee - An Inspector of Mines nominated in this behalf by the Chief Inspector
shall act as the Secretary to the Committee.]
7[5. Remuneration - Members of the Committee shall receive such honorarium as the Central Government
may fix.]
1. Relettered, ibid
2. Inserted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
3. Renumbered by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
4. Substituted by GSR 1786 dated 30.9.1970
5. Omitted, ibid. 6. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
7. substituted by GSR 316, dated 26.4.1986.
1[6. * * * * *]
7. Resignation.- (1) A member other than the Chairman may resign the office by writing under his hand
addressed to the Chairman .
(2) The Chairman may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government.
(3) The resignation referred to in sub. rule(1) or sub-rule (2) above shall take effect from the date of its
acceptance 2[or on the expiry of thirty days from the date of receipt of such resignation whichever is
earlier] by the Chairman of the Central Government as the case may be.
8. Absence from India - (1) Before a member leaves India (a) he shall intimate to the Chairman the date
of his departure from and the date of his expected return to India; and
(b) if he intends to be absent from India for a period longer than six months, he shall tender his
registration.
(2) If any member leaves India without taking the action required by sub-rule (1) he shall be deemed to
have resigned with effect from the date of his departure from India.
9. Notification of Vacancies - (1) The Chairman shall inform the Central Government as soon as a vacancy
occurs in the membership of the 4[Committee] by the resignation or death of a member.
(2) In case such a vacancy occurs by the death of the Chairman, information shall be furnished to the
Central Government by the Chief Inspector or the Inspector 3[appointed] to the Committee by the
Government, as the case may be.
1. Omitted, ibid
2. Inserted by SRO 2062 dated 14.6.1957
3. Substituted by GSR 1886, dated 25.12.1965
4. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
10. Disposal of business - (1) All questions which the 1[Committee] is required to consider shall be
considered either at its meetings or by circulation of papers as the Chairman may direct:
Provided that papers need not be circulated to any member who is absent from India at the time.
(2) When a question is referred by circulation of papers, any member may request that the question be
considered at a meeting of the 1[Committee] and thereupon the Chairman may direct that it be so
considered:
Provided that if three or more members make such a request, the Chairman shall direct that it be so
considered.

11. Time and place of meetings - The 1[Committee] shall meet at such places and time as may be
appointed by the Chairman .
12. Notice of meetings - (1) The Secretary to the 1[Committee] shall give at least fourteen days’ notice to
every member of the 1[Committee] present in India of the time and place fixed for each meeting and shall
send to every such member agenda of business to be disposed off at that meeting, not less than seven days
before the meeting :
Provided that when an emergent meeting is called, at least two days’ clear notice shall be given.
2[1A * * * * * *]
3[(2) Notices referred to in sub-rule(1) shall be delivered at or posted to, the usual place of residence of the
member.”]
4[(3)] No business which is not on the agenda shall be considered at a meeting without the permission of the
Chairman.
1. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
2. Omitted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
3. Inserted, Ibid
4. Renumbered, ibid
13. Presiding at meeting- The Chairman shall preside at every meeting of the (meeting at which he is
present. If the Chairman is absent from any meeting, the members present shall elect one of them to preside
over the meeting and the member so elected shall at that meeting exercise all the powers of the Chairman .
14. Quorum – No business shall be transacted at a meeting of the 1[Committee] unless at least four
members including are present;
Provided that at any meeting in which less than 1[four members including the Chairman] are present, the
Chairman may adjourn the meeting to a date not less than fourteen days later and inform the members
present and notify other members that he proposes to dispose off the business at the adjourned meeting
irrespective of the quorum, and it shall thereupon be lawful to dispose off the business at such adjourned
meeting irrespective of the number of members attending.
15. Decision by majority – (1) Every question referred to the 1[Committee] by circulation of papers shall,
unless the Chairman , in pursuance of sub-rule(2) of rule 10 reserves it for consideration at a meeting, be
decided in accordance with the opinions of the majority sending their opinions within the time allowed .
(2)All questions referred to a meeting of the 1[Committee] shall be decided by a majority of votes of the
members present and voting on that question.
(3) In the case of an equal division of votes or opinions, the Chairman shall exercise an additional vote or
opinion.
(4) Any member disagreeing with a decision of the 1[Committee] may enter a note of dissent which shall
form part of the record of the proceedings.
16. Minutes of the meetings- (1) The Secretary of the 1[Committee] shall circulate the proceedings of
each meeting to all members of the Committee present in India, and thereafter record the proceedings
in a minute book which shall be kept for permanent record.
1. Substituted by GSR 316, dated 26.4.1986
(2) The record of proceedings of each meeting shall be signed by the
Chairman.
17. Allowances to non-official members- Travelling and daily allowance to non-official members of the
1[Committee] shall be regulated in accordance with the orders regarding allowances to non- official
members of 1[Committee] Commissions and Boards of Enquiry issued by the Central Government
from time to time.

18. Correspondence and accounts- The Secretary of the 1[Committee] shall conduct all correspondence
of the Committee and keep its account.
19. Appearance at hearings – Any appearance required to be made by a party before the 1[Committee] ,
except for purposes of being examined as a witness ,may be made either in person or by his agent duly
authorised in writing, or by a legal practitioner on his behalf.
20. Proceedings to be in camera- Unless the Chairman otherwise directs, the proceedings of the
1[Committee] shall be conducted in camera and shall be regarded as confidential in nature.
CHAPTER – III
COURT OF INQUIRY
21. Court of inquiry to be public - The person appointed to hold inquiry under section 24 of the Act shall
hold the inquiry in public in such manner and under such conditions as the Court thinks most effectual for
ascertaining the causes and circumstances of the accident or other occurrences and for enabling the Court to
make the report.
1. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
22. Recovery of expenses – 1[(1) If a court of inquiry finds, that the accident was due to any carelessness
or negligence on the part of the management, the court may direct the recovery of the expenses of such
court ,including any expenses incurred with the previous sanction of the court and any other expenses
connected with the enquiry which the court may direct as recoverable from the owner of the mine
concerned, in such manner and within such time as the court may specify.]
2[(2) The amount directed to be recovered under sub rule(1) may, on application by the Chief Inspector
or an Inspector to the concerned authority, be recovered from the owner in the same manner as an arrears of
land revenue.]
CHAPTER - IV
CERTIFYING SURGEONS
23. Powers of Certifying Surgeon - A certifying Surgeon may within the local limits of his jurisdiction
or in respect of mines or class or description of mines assigned to him make such inspection,
examination or inquiry as he thinks fit for the purpose of the Act ,and it shall be the duty of owner,
agent or manager of the mine concerned to afford the Certifying Surgeon all reasonable facilities for
carrying out such inspections, examination or inquiry as the case may be.
24. Duties of Certifying Surgeon – 2[(1) On receipt of a reference under sub section (1) of section 43 of
the Act, the certifying surgeon shall, after giving prior notice regarding date, time and place for medical
examination and upon examining the person sent for such examination, prepare the age and fitness
certificate and deliver the same to the manager of the mine concerned after retaining a copy thereof.]
1. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 26.12.1965
2. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986

(2)The Certifying Surgeon shall, upon a request being made to him by the Chief Inspector of
Inspector, carry out such examination and furnish him with such report as he may indicate in
respect of any mine or class or description of mines in which operations involve any risk of injury
to the health of any person or class of persons employed therein.
1 [Rules 25 ,26,27 Omitted ]
28. Fresh examination - (1) If any person sent up for medical examination in pursuance 2[* * *] of
section 43 2[* * *] is not certified to be fit by the Certifying Surgeon, he shall not without the
permission in writing of an Inspector, be sent for another medical examination unless a period of six
months has elapsed from the time when he was last sent up for medical examination.
(2) Any certificate obtained in contravention of sub-rule (1) shall be void.
1 [Rule 29 – omitted]
3[CHAPTER - IV-A
MEDICAL EXAMINATION OF PERSONS EMPLOYED OR TO BE EMPLOYED IN MINES
29A Applicability of this Chapter - Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to persons who are employed
purely on temporary or causal basis for a continuous period not exceeding six months.
29B. Initial and periodical medical examinations - After such date or dates as the Central Government
may by notification in the Official Gazette appoint in this behalf, the owner, agent or manager of every
mine shall make arrangements1. Omitted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
2. Omitted by GSR 1886 dated 26.12.1965
3. Inserted by GSR 557(E) dated 16.11.1978
(a)(i) for the initial medical examination of every person employed in the mine, within a period of five
years of the date so notified and the said examination shall be so arranged over a period of five years that
one fifth of the persons employed at the mine undergo the examination every year;
Provided that in the case of a mine where a system of carrying out of such medical examination
(of a comparable standard as determined by the Chief Inspector) is already in existence before the date
aforesaid, a person who has undergone a medical examination under such a system on a date not earlier
than five years before the date aforesaid, shall be deemed to have undergone an initial medical examination
under this sub clause and the last date of his medical examination under the said system shall be taken to be
the date of his initial medical examination under these rules;
(ii) for the initial medical examination of every person seeking employment in a mine, unless such
person has already undergone within the preceding five years, a medical examination under
these rules while in employment at another mine; and
(b) for the periodical medical examination thereafter of every person employed in the mine at intervals of
not more than five years.
1[Provided that for the persons who are engaged in the process of mining or milling of asbestos ,periodic
medical examination shall be done at least once in every twelve months and every such examination shall

include all the tests in Form “P” of the First Schedule except the X- Ray examination, which shall be
carried out once in every three years.
Provided further that the periodic medical examination or the X Ray examination or both , shall be
conducted at more frequent intervals if the examining authority deems it necessary to confirm a suspected
case of a dust related disease.]
1. Inserted by GSR 707(E) dated 21.7.1989
29C. Examining authorities - The medical examination aforesaid shall be carried out by a Medical Officer
appointed for the mine or a Medical Officer in the employment of the owner of the mine, if any, or by any
medical officer employed in the Coal Mines Welfare Fund Organisation or any other mines Welfare
organisation, failing which by any State or Central Government medical officer not below the rank of an
Assistant Civil Surgeon.
29D. Notice of medical examination - (1) In respect of every medical examination under rule 29B, the
manager of the mine concerned shall give at least twenty days’ prior notice in writing to the person to be
examined, in Form M, provided that in case of the initial medical examination of a person seeking
employment at a mine, the period of notice may be shorter.
(2) A copy of every such notice issued shall be sent by the manager to the examining authority
and in the case of periodical medical examination of a person, the copies of the previous medical
certificate issued in Form O, pertaining to the persons concerned shall also be sent to the
examining authority by the manager.
(3) A person, who for any reasonable cause, fails to submit himself for a medical examination or
in accordance with the notice issued to him under sub-rule(i), shall be given a second notice of a
minimum period of ten days in Form N, by the manager and a copy of every such notice shall be
sent by the manager to the examining authority.
(4) The examining authority shall inform the manager whether the person concerned has
submitted himself for medical examination or not.
29E. Failure to undergo medical examination - A person who without reasonable cause, fails to submit
himself for medical examination in accordance with a notice issued to him under sub-rule(3) of rule 29D,
shall be liable to be discharged from service;
Provided that a person who tenders himself so liable to be discharged for failure to submit himself
for medical examination shall be required to show cause why he could not comply with the notice within
the time specified therein. If his explanation is found satisfactory by the management; he shall be given
another chance to appear for medical examination.In case his explanation is not found satisfactory by the
management, his service shall be terminated by the management :
Provided further that in case of any dispute, the same shall be referred to the Chief Inspector for
his decision within 60 days of the order communicated by the owner, agent or manager of the mine to the
said person.
29 E . Failure to undergo medical examination .- A person who without reasonable cause ,fails to submit
himself for medical examination in accordance with a notice issued to him under sub-rule (3) of rule 29D,
shall be liable to be discharged from service;
Provided that a person who renders himself so liable to be discharged for failure to submit himself for
medical examination shall be required to show cause why he could not comply with the notice within the
time specified therein. If his explanation is found satisfactory by the management ;he shall be given another

chance to appear for medical examination . In case his explanation is not found satisfactory by the
management, his service shall be terminated by the management;
Provided further that in case of any dispute, the same shall be referred to the Chief Inspector for his
decision within 60 days of the order communicated by the owner ,agent or manager of the mine to the said
person.
29F. Standard and report of medical examination -(1) The examining authority holding initial medical
examination under sub clause(i) of clause (a), or periodical medical examination under clause (b) of rule
29B shall examine a person according to the standard laid down in Form P and the initial medical
examination under sub clause (ii) of clause (a) of rule 29B of all persons seeking employment in a mine
shall be according to the standard laid down in Form P-I.
(2) As soon as may be, after examination, a copy of the medical certificate in Form O, shall be
issued by the examining authority to the person concerned by Registered post or delivered under
receipt and another copy sent to the manager of the mine concerned by Registered post or
delivered under receipt.
(3) The examining authority shall retain the third copy of the medical certificate.
(4) In the case of periodical medical examination of person, the examining authority shall also
send the copy of previous medical certificates of the person concerned received in pursuance of
sub-rule(1) of rule 29D, to the manager of the mine concerned.
29G Retention and transfer of medical certificates – (1) All medical certificates 1[including all medical
examination records with medical history and job details to depict the occupational dust exposure profile]
of persons employed or to be employed in a mine shall be retained in the possession of the manager of the
mine so long as the person is employed in the mine and for a period of 2[ten] years thereafter:
Provided that the manager of a mine where such person is or was employed shall, if so requested by the
manager of any other mine where the person is to be employed, send to him all medical certificates with
respect to such person.
(2) If the examining authority who conducts medical examination of persons employed or to be
employed in any mine is relieved of his duties regarding medical examination, the medical
practitioner shall transfer all records of medical examination in his possession to the manager of
the mine concerned.
29H. Identity of candidates - (1) Every candidate for medical examination under clause (a) of rule
29B shall, at the time of examination, hand over three unmounted photographs (passport size) of himself to
the examining authority. The examining authority, after satisfying itself that each photograph is a likeness
of the candidate, shall endorse each of them with the name and father’s name or husband’s name of the
candidate.
(2) The examining authority, shall also record the left hand thumb impression or the signature of
every candidate appearing before it for medical examination on the copies of the medical
certificate in Form O.
1. Inserted by GSR 707(E) dated 21.7.89
2. Inserted by ibid
29 I. Medical Examination of women - No women shall, without her consent, be medically examined by a
male medical practitioner except in the presence of another women.
29J. Appeal for re-examination - (1) Where as a result of an initial medical examination under clause (a),
or of periodical medical examination under clause (b) of rule 29B, a person has been declared unfit for
employment in mines or in particular category of mines or in any specified operations in mine , he may,
within thirty days of the receipt by him of a copy of the Certificate referred to in sub-rule(2) of rule 29F,

file an appeal with the manager of the mine against the declaration aforesaid, and request for a medical reexamination by an Appellate Medical Board constituted under rule 29K.
(2)(a) The manager shall arrange to have the appellant medically re-examined by the Appellate Medical
Board within thirty days of the receipt of the Appeal, and shall give to the Appellant fifteen days’ prior
notice of the medical re-examination by the Appellate Medical Board in Form Q.
(b) A person, who for any reasonable cause, fails to submit himself for a medical re-examination in
accordance with the notice given to him under clause (a), shall be given another notice in Form R in
similar manner.
(c) A person who has, without reasonable cause, fails to submit himself for a medical re-examination in
accordance with a notice given to him under clause (b) shall cease to be in employment at the mine or in
a particular category of mines or in any specified operations in mine, as the case may be, after the
expiry of thirty days from the last date notified for his medical re-examination.
(3) In respect of every medical re-examination by the Appellate Medical Board, the appellant shall pay
such fees and the medical examination shall be conducted in such manner as may be determined by the
Appellate Medical Board. In case the Appellate Medical Board finds him fit for employment in mines,
the fees shall be reimbursed in full to the appellant by the owner of the mine where he is employed.
29K. Constitution of Appellate Medical Board - For the purpose of medical re-examination on
appeal, the Appellate Medical Board shall consist of the following officers, namely :
(a) One duly qualified Medical Officer in the employment of the Directorate General of Mines Safety who
shall also act as the Convenor of the Board.
(b) One Medical Officer duly qualified in allopathic system of medicine to be nominated by the Chief
Inspector in consultant with the Welfare Organisation set up by the Central Government for the persons
employed in the mine.
(c) One Medical Officer duly qualified in allopathic system of medicine employed in the State or Central
Government or a Government undertaking and not below the rank of Assistant Civil Surgeon.
Provided that if a Medical Officer under clause (b) or clause (c) is not available, the Appellate
Medical Board shall be constituted with two persons only.
29L. Standard and report of medical re-examination by the Appellate Medical Board - The
Appellate Medical Board shall medically examine the appellant in accordance with the standard laid down
in Form P for initial medical examination of workers already in employment as well as periodical medical
examination and in accordance with the standard laid down Form P-I for initial medical examination of the
persons to employed and shall issue to the manager of the mine concerned and to the appellant a medical
certificate in Form S.
29M. Unfit persons not to be employed - (1) Where, as a result of an initial medical examination made
under clause (a), or of a periodical medical examination under clause (b) of rule 29B a person has been
declared unfit for employment in mines or in a particular category of mines or in any specified operations
in mine, he shall not be employed or continue to employed in mine or in the category of mines or on the
operations specified, after the expiry of thirty days from the date of his medical examination unless he has
filed an appeal under sub rule (1) of rule 29J against the declaration.
(2) Where the person concerned has filed an appeal under sub-rule (1) of rule 29J, but has been
declared by the Appellate Medical Board, after a medical re-examination, to be unfit for
employment in mines or in a particular category of mines or on any specified operations in mines,
he shall not be employed or continue to be employed in mine or in the category of mines or on
the operations specified, after the expiry of thirty days from the date of his medical re-examination
by the Appellate Medical Board:

Provided that, if the Medical Officer carrying out the initial medical examination under
clause (a), or the periodical examination under clause (b) of rule 29B, or the Appellate Medical
Board carrying out the medical re-examination of persons already in employment is of the opinion
that the disability of the person examined is of such a nature and degree that it will not seriously
affect or interfere with the normal discharge of his duties, it may recommend his continuation in
employment in the mine for a period not exceeding six months during which such person may get
his disability cured or controlled and submit himself for another medical examination and be
declared fit.
29N. Compensation for industrial disease - if as a result of any medical examination under these rules
or under the regulations, a person is found to have contacted any disease specified in Part C of Schedule III
to the Workmen’s compensation Act. 1923, the provision of section 3 of that Act shall become applicable
in respect of that person.
29O. Cost of medical examination - Subject to the provisions of sub-rule(3) of rule 29J full cost of
every medical examination under these rules, shall be borne by the owner of the mine concerned.
29P. Annual returns - (1) On or before the 20th day of February every year, the manager of every mine
shall submit to the Chief Inspector annual returns in respect of the preceding calendar year in Form T.
(2) If a mine is abandoned or working thereof is discontinued over a period exceeding sixty days or if a
change occurs in the ownership of a mine, the returns required under sub rule (1) shall be submitted
within thirty days of abandonment or change of ownership or within ninety days of discontinuance, as
the case may be.
1[CHAPTER IV B
WORKMEN’S INSPECTOR AND SAFETY COMMITTEE
29Q Workmen’s Inspector - (1) (a) For every mine wherein 500 or more persons are ordinarily employed,
the owner, agent or manager shall designate three suitably qualified employees of the mine in consultation
with the registered trade union in the mine and where there are more than one registered trade unions, the
union recognised as per procedure in practice or the most representative union as per the membership
records available at that point of time ,and if there are no registered trade unions, in consultation with the
elected representative of the workmen, as technical experts, to carry out inspection of the mine on behalf of
the workers employed therein, one each for mining operations, electrical installations and mechanical
installations. When the number of persons employed in a mine exceeds 1500, the Workmen’s Inspector
shall be assisted by one additional Workmen’s Inspector in mining discipline for every additional 1000
persons or part thereof.
(b) In every mine, the owner, agent or manager shall constitute in the manner laid down in clause (a), a
panel of Workmen’s Inspector who may serve as substitute during absence of regular Workmen’s
Inspector.
(c) In the panel there shall be at least one Workmen’s Inspector each for mining, electrical and mechanical
installations and operations.
(2) No person shall act as a Workmen’s Inspector of a mine unless –
1. Inserted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
(a) he possesses an Overman’s or Foreman’s Certificate granted under the Act :
Provided that -

(i) in relation to electrical machinery installed in mines, a person holding a valid Electrical Supervisor’s
Certificate of Competency covering mining installations, issued under sub-rule(1) of rule 45 read with
clause (ii) of sub-rule (1) of rule 131 of the Indian Electricity Rules, 1956 framed under the Indian
Electricity Act ,1910 shall be so designated; and
(ii) In relation to other machinery and mechanical appliances installed in mines a person appointed to
secure the installation, running and maintenance in safe working order of machinery in the mine, being
not less in status than that of an Overman, Mine Foreman or Electrical Supervisor shall be so
designated.
(b) he has at least five years of experience in mines including at least two years in workings of the mines
for which he is nominated,and
(c) he has undergone an orientation training course for Workmen’s Inspector consisting of not less than
thirty lectures and demonstrations, of not less than two hours’ duration each, in accordance with the
syllabus specified by and at a centre approved by the Chief Inspector by a general or special order.
(3) The Workmen’s Inspector shall perform the duties mentioned in clause (a) of sub rule (1) of rule 29R
for two days in every week; on remaining days of the week, he shall perform his normal duties unless
called upon to perform the duties mentioned in clauses(b) and (c) of sub-rule(1) of rule 29R.
(4) (a) The owner, agent or manager shall afford the Workmen’s Inspector all reasonable facilities for
making any entry, inspection, measurement, examination or inquiry in connection with his duties.
(b) An official of the mine shall accompany the Workmen’s Inspector during his inspection.
(c) The Workmen’s Inspector may carry out his inspection at any time.
(5) When there occurs an accident or dangerous occurrence in or about a mine , the owner, agent or
manager shall forthwith inform the concerned Workmen’s Inspector about the accident or the
occurrence.
(6) The Workmen’s Inspector shall not exercise his powers to impede or obstruct the working of the mine.
(7) A Workmen’s Inspector nominated under sub-rule(1) shall, unless he resigns from his office, hold
office for a period of three years from the date of his nomination and shall be eligible for one renomination.
(8) No owner, agent or manager shall take any action against a Workmen’s Inspector for any of his actions
in the discharge of his duties and functions laid down in these rules.
29R. Duties of Workmen’s Inspector - (1) The duties of the Workmen’s Inspector shall be -
(a) to inspect all shafts, inclines, roads, workplaces and the equipment thereat including the equipment for
conveyance and transport of workers;
(b) in case of any urgent and immediate danger that comes to his notice ;
i) to inform the manager and the Inspector about the same; and
ii) to suggest remedial measures necessary to avoid the danger ; and
(c) to accompany the Inspector in the course of complete inspection of the mine and also during such
other inspections as may be considered necessary by the Inspector.
(2) The Workmen’s Inspector shall record a full report of the matters ascertained as a result of his
inspection in an interleaved paged and bound register kept for the purpose in the mine in Form U. The

Workmen’s Inspector making the entry in the register aforesaid shall duly sign such entries with date
and take a copy of the entries for his record.
29S. Action on the report of Workmen’s Inspector -
(1) The owner, agent or manager of the mine shall enter in the register mentioned in sub-rule (2) of rule
29R, within a period of 15 days from the date of entry in the register, remarks thereon showing the
remedial measures taken and the date on which such action was taken.
(2) In case of any difference of opinion between the Workmen’s Inspector and the owner, agent or
manager, a copy of the report with remarks thereon regarding such difference of opinion shall be sent by
the owner, agent or manager to the Chief Inspector or an Inspector for decision.
29T Safety Committee - For every mine wherein more than 100 persons are ordinarily employed, the
owner, agent or manager shall constitute a Safety Committee for promoting Safety in the mine;
Provided that the Chief Inspector or an Inspector may by a general or special order in writing
require the owner, agent or manager of any group of specified mines or of all mines in a specified area to
constitute a group Safety Committee in such manner and subject to such conditions as he may specify in the
order.
29U Composition of Safety Committee _ The Safety Committee shall consist of :-
(a) the manager who shall be the Chairman ;
(b) five officials or competent persons of the mine nominated by the Chairman ;
(c) five workmen nominated by the workmen of the mine in accordance with the procedure prescribed in
clause (a) of sub-rule(1) of rule 29Q for nomination of Workmen’s Inspector;
(d) Workmen’s Inspector where so designated; and
(e) the Safety Officer, or where there is no Safety Officer, the senior most mine official next to the
manager, who shall act as Secretary to the Committee;
Provided that any other official, competent person or work person may be co-opted by the Chairman as a
member of the Committee on any day or days of the meeting, if considered necessary.
29V. Functions of Safety Committee - The functions of the Committee shall be-
(1) to discuss remedial measures against the unsafe conditions and practices in the mine as pointed out in
the reports of Workmen’s Inspector or otherwise brought to the notice of the Committee and make
appropriate recommendations;
(2) to consider, before commencement of operations in any new district of mine or commissioning of new
electrical or mechanical installation or introduction of new mining technique, the proposed Safety and
health measures including related codes of practice and to make appropriate recommendations;
(3) to discuss the report of inquiry into accident and make appropriate recommendations;
(4) to formulate and implement appropriate Safety campaign based on analysis of accidents;
(5) to meet at least once in 30 days to consider the matter placed before it and any other matter that may be
raised by the members and make such recommendations as it may deem fit; and
(6) to serve as a forum for communication on Safety and occupational health matters.
29W Implementation of recommendations of the Safety Committee - The owner, agent or manager
shall, within a period of 15 days from the date of receipt of the recommendations of the Safety Committee,
shall indicate to the Secretary to the Safety Committee, the action taken to implement the
recommendations.]

CHAPTER -V
HEALTH AND SANITATION PROVISIONS
30. Quantity of drinking water - (1) The quantity of drinking water to be provided in a mine or any part
thereof shall be on a scale of at least two litres for every person employed at any one time and such
drinking water shall be readily available at conveniently accessible points during the whole of the working
shift.
(2) Where 100 persons or more are employed, either above ground or in opencast workings, at any one
time, an Inspector may by order in writing require the drinking water to be effectively cooled by
mechanical or other means available.
(3) No charge shall be made for the drinking water so supplied.
31. Storage of drinking water – 1[(1) If drinking water is not provided from taps connected with constant
water- supply system, it shall be kept cool in suitable vessels sheltered from whether and such vessels
shall be emptied, cleaned and refilled very day. Steps shall be taken to preserve the water, the storage
vessels and the vessels used for drinking water in a clean and hygienic condition.]
(2) If the source of drinking water is not from a public water supply system, an Inspector may by order in
writing require the owner, agent or manager of the mine to submit with the least possible delay a
certificate from a competent health authority or analyst as to the fitness of the water for human
consumption.
32. Decision of Chief Inspector final - If any question arises as to whether water supply arrangements are
satisfactory and in accordance with the requirements of section 19 and rules 30 and 31, the decision of
the Chief Inspector shall be final.
1. Substituted by GSR 1786 dated 30.9.1970
33. Surface latrines and urinals. - (1) On the surface at every mine, adequate latrine and urinal
accommodation shall be provided at conveniently accessible places separately for the use of males and
females employed in the mine.
(2) The scale of latrine accommodation shall be at least one seat for every 50 males and at least one seat
for every 50 females employed at one time;
Provided that where sanitary latrines are maintained in bathing places, the number of latrines to be
provided under this rule may include such sanitary latrines.
Note – In calculating latrine accommodation, any fraction less than 50 shall be reckoned as 50.
34. Standards of constructions .- Every latrine on the surface provided for the use of persons employed in
a mine shall conform to the following standards of construction :
a) It shall be on a site approved of in writing by an Inspector ,
b) It shall be built of brick or other suitable building material ,
c) It shall be adequately drained and properly ventilated and afforded effective protection from the
weather,
d) It shall be of a type approved of in writing by a Inspector ,
e) the floor and any interior surface of walls up to a height of 1[1.25 metres] shall be cement punned or
otherwise so finished as to provide a smooth impervious surface ,

f) It shall be partitioned off so as to secure privacy and shall have a proper door and fastenings, and where
a latrine intended for the use of one sex adjoins a latrine intended for the use of other sex, the
approaches shall be separate,
g) where a latrine is of the service type, the service chamber shall be provided with an efficient trap door
and the receptacle for night-soil shall be of galvanised iron ,
1. Substituted by GSR 31 dated 29.12.1960
h) the interior walls, ceilings and partitions shall be white-washed once at least in very four months, and
the dare of such white-washing shall be recorded in a book kept at the mine for the purpose;
Provided that this requirement regarding white-washing shall not apply to those parts of walls,
ceilings or partitions which are laid in glazed tiles or otherwise finished so as to provide a smooth polished
and impervious surface but all these parts shall be washed with suitable detergents and disinfectants at least
once in every seven days.
35. Sign-boards to be displayed - Where persons of both sexes are employed, there shall be displayed
outside each latrine a signboard in the language understood by the majority of workpersons “For Males” or
“For Females” as the case may be. Each sign board shall also have the figure of a man or a women as the
case may be.
36. Provision of water for washing etc. - (1) Where a piped water supply is available, a sufficient number
of water taps, conveniently accessible, shall be provided in or near such latrines.
(2) If piped water supply is not available, a sufficient quantity of water shall be kept stored in suitable
receptacles near latrines.
37. Underground latrines - If in any mine more than fifty persons are employed underground at any one
time, latrines shall be provided underground on a scale approved by an Inspector at convenient points near
the working shafts and at entrances to the districts or sections of the mine. The latrines shall be of a type
approved of in writing by an Inspector.
38. Sanitation- (1) At every mine all underground working places and travelling roadways shall be kept
clean from excreta.
(2) All latrines and urinals in or about a mine shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(3) Receptacles for night-soil shall be cleaned and disinfected at least once in every day.
(4) Proper arrangements shall be made on the surface for the disposal of night-soil and urine. Such
arrangements shall comply with the requirements of any health authority or Mines Board within whose
jurisdiction the mine is situated.
39. Obligation of workpersons-(1) No person shall want only misuse or damage the latrines provided
either on the surface or underground.
(2) No person shall pollute the underground working of a mine with excreta. All persons employed
underground shall acquaint themselves with the sanitary arrangements provided from time to time in the
section of the mine in which they have to work or pass.
CHAPTER - VI
FIRST-AID AND MEDICAL APPLIANCES

1[40. Arrangements for training persons in first-aid etc.-(1) It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or
manager of a mine to see that adequate and suitable arrangements are made for the training of persons in
first-aid and the provision of such equipment as is prescribed in these rules.
(2) (a) It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or manager to see that adequate and suitable arrangements
are made for the speedy removal from the mine to a dispensary or hospital ,of persons employed in the
mine who while on duty suffers from serious bodily injury or illness of a serious nature.
(b) Unless otherwise approved by an order in writing of the Chief Inspector or an Inspector and subject to
such conditions as may be specified therein, the arrangements for the purpose of clause(a) shall be by
means of a proper ambulance van, and in case such ambulance van is not readily available in spite of
proper and timely requisition, it may be by other suitable motor vehicle in which the person can be
taken in a supine condition on a stretcher.)
1. Substituted by GSR 1786 dated 30.9.1970
41. First-aid qualifications - No person other than qualified nurse, dresser, compounder-cum-dresser or
medical practitioner shall be appointed to render first-aid ,or to be in charge of a first-aid station referred to
in rule 44,unless he is the holder of a valid first-aid certificate of the standard of St. John’s Ambulance
Association (India).
1[42. First aid personnel - (1) The owner, agent or manager of a mine shall see that every first-aid station
provided under rule 44 is placed, during every working shift ,in charge of a person holding qualifications
specified in rule 41. The persons in charge of a first aid station in any shift should be readily available
throughout the shift.
(2) The name and designation of every person appointed to be in charge of a first -aid station shall be
prominently ,displayed at every first-aid station.
(3) An up-to-date list of persons appointed to be in charge of first-aid stations in the mine shall be kept in
the office of the mine and also displayed prominently at the first-aid room.]
43. 2[First-aid] rooms (1) At every mine employing more than 150 persons on any one day of the
preceding calendar year, there shall be provided and maintained in good order a suitable first-aid room.
3[(2) The first-aid room shall be situated at a convenient place on the surface of the mine and shall be
used only for first-aid work.]
(3) The 4[first-aid] room shall have a floor space of not less than 10 square metres and shall contain at least
the equipment specified in the Second Schedule
5[(4)(a) The first-aid room shall be in charge of a qualified medical practitioner, where the number of
persons ordinarily employed in a mine is more than 1000, such medical practitioner shall be a whole time
employee at the mine.
1. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 26.12.1965.
2. Substituted by GSR 239 dt. 3.2.1965
3. Inserted, ibid.
4. Substituted by GSR 31 dt. 29.12.1960.
5. Substituted by GSR 1786 dt. 30.9.1970
(b) The medical practitioner referred to in clause (a) shall be assisted by a nurse and a dresser or a
compounder and a dresser who are qualified in the Allopathic system of medicine. Whenever the Chief
Inspector feels it necessary, he may require by an order in writing that such number of additional nurse
or compounders or dressers shall be appointed to assist the medical practitioner as may be specified by
him.

(c) The nurse, compounder or dresser referred to in clause (b) shall be whole time employee of the
mine and shall be readily available at the first-aid room throughout the period when persons work at the
mine :
Provided that wherein conformity with any other law inforce, or otherwise an adequately equipped
hospital or dispensary belonging to the owner of the mine or to any Mines Welfare Organisation is provided
and maintained at or in the immediate vicinity of the mine, the Chief Inspector or an Inspector authorised
by him in this behalf may grant exemption from the provision of this sub-rule subject to such conditions as
he may specify in writing.
(5) Every person who suffers an injury during the course of work shall report for examination or treatment
at the first aid room, hospital or dispensary, as the case may be, before leaving the mine, irrespective of
first-aid having been rendered at or near the place of work.
1[44. First aid stations.-(1) At every mine there shall be provided and maintained first-aid equipment as
prescribed in the Third Schedule, at conveniently accessible stations where injured persons may receive
first-aid treatment, as follows :
(a) above ground, a first- aid station –
(i) at the top of every shaft or incline where men or material are normally wound or hauled;
(ii) in every workshop;
1. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965
(iii) at every screening plant and loading place; and
(iv) at every other place where more than 50 persons are
employed at any one time.
(b) In every opencast working, one first-aid station for every 50 persons or part thereof, employed at any
one time; and
(c) below ground, one first-aid station -
i) at the bottom of every shaft where men or material are normally wound, and at or near every
plant;
ii) near the drive end of every haulage;
iii) in or at the entrance to every district or section of the mine;
Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall be construed to require the provision of a firstaid station within 300 metres of another first-aid station.
(2) It shall be the duty of the persons appointed to be in charge of a first-aid station under rule 42, to see
that the equipment provided at the station is kept in good order and that it is replenished whenever
necessary.
(3) An up-to-date list of all first-aid stations provided in the mine shall be kept in the office of the mine
and also displayed prominently at the first-aid room.]
1[45. Carrying of first-aid outfit by officials._ Not with standing anything contained in rule 42, every
Overman, foreman, sirdar, mate, shot-firer, blaster, electrician and mechanic in a mine shall hold the firstaid qualifications specified in rule 41 and shall carry, while on duty, a first-aid outfit consisting of one large
sterilised dressing, one small sterilised dressing and an ampoule of tincture of iodine or other suitable
antiseptic, and such outfit shall be securely packed to protect it against dirt and water.]
1. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965

1[45.A Medical attention in case of injury - (1) Every person receiving an injury in the course of his
duty shall, as soon as possible, report the same to an official. Where the person receiving an injury is not in
a position to report the same to an official, it shall be the duty of the person who first comes to know of it to
report the same to an official. The official shall make such arrangements for rendering first aid to the
injured as may be required. If in the opinion of the official the injury is of such a nature as to require
immediate attention by the medical practitioner he shall arrange for the medical practitioner to be called.
(2) If an official who is required to carry a first-aid outfit under rule 45 receives information about injury
to a work person, he shall himself attend to the injured person.
(3) It shall be the duty of the person in charge of the nearest first-aid station provided under rule 44 to
render such first-aid to the injured person as may be necessary.
CHAPTER - VII
EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS
46. Persons holding positions of supervision or management etc. - For the purpose of Section 37, the
following shall be deemed to be persons holding position of supervision or management or employed in
a confidential capacity -
2[(a) manager, undermanager, underground manager, assistant manager, ventilation officer and Safety
officer;]
(b) mining, electrical and mechanical engineer ;
2[(c) overman, foreman, sirdar and mate ;]
(d) mechanical and electrical foreman and electrical supervisor ;
(e) surveyor and assistant surveyor;
(f) medical officer, chemist, assayer, metallurgist and welfare or personnel officer
3[ * * * ]
4[(g)] any other person who in the opinion of the Chief Inspector holds a position of supervision or
management.
1. Inserted by GSR 1786 dated 30.9.1970
2. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965
3. Omitted by GSR 312 dated 15.1.1957
4. Relettered, ibid
47. Weekly day of rest – (1) For the purpose of sections 28 and 29, a day of rest for any person shall
mean period of rest of at least 24 consecutive hours.
(2) There shall be posted up in a conspicuous place out side the office of every mine a notice showing the
weekly day or rest. Where the weekly day of rest is not the same day for all persons employed in the mine,
the notice shall show the day of rest allowed to each relay, or set of persons or individual.
48. Notice regarding hours of work - (1) The notices of hours of work referred to in sub-section (1) of
section 36 shall be maintained in Form A.
(2) In addition to the particulars specified in sub-section(1) and (3) of section 36, the notice shall also
show the particulars of the system in which periodical changes of shifts are made for all or each set of
persons employed in the mine.
(3) A copy of the notice shall be affixed on the first page in the registers maintained in Forms B,C,D and
E.
49. Compensatory days of rest – (1) The compensatory days of rest to be allowed under sub-section (1)
of section 29 shall be so spaced that in any one week not more than two such days shall be allowed to any
one person.

(2) On or before the last day of every month, there shall be displayed on a notice board outside the office
of the mine a list of all persons who have not been allowed compensatory days of rest during that month,
and the dates on which compensatory days of rest will be allowed to them in the following two months.
(3) In the event of a person being discharged or dismissed, such number of compensatory days as are due
to him shall not be reckoned as part of any period of notice to which he is entitled under any rule, award,
agreement or contract of service, and he shall be allowed all such compensatory days of rest before the date
of his discharge or dismissal.
(4) There shall be maintained at every mine a register of compensatory days of rest in Form F.
50. Exemption from hours and limitation of employment - For the purpose of section 39 of the Act,
male adults employed in a mine on any work specified in column 1 of the Fourth Schedule shall be
exempted from the provisions of the sections of the Act specified in column 2, subject to such conditions as
are specified in column 3.
1[51. Termination of employment - When the employment of a person in a mine is terminated, whether by
way of dismissal, discharge or otherwise, or where such person leaves the employment, the date of such
termination or leaving shall be entered against his name in the register maintained in Form B.]
2[52. Employment of apprentices and trainees - No apprentice or trainee of the age of sixteen to eighteen
years shall be employed in a mine except under immediate supervision of a competent person and no such
apprentice or trainee shall be employed in a mine-
(a) in any work which is unduly arduous ; or
(b) in close proximity to any machinery involving risk of injury from any moving part of the
machines; or
(c) at any place where the dust produced in mining operations is known to constitute a hazard to health .]
CHAPTER - VIII
LEAVE WITH WAGES AND OVERTIME
53. Register of leave with wages – 1[(1) The owner, agent or manager of every mine shall maintain in
respect of every employee thereof a record of leave with wages in Form G and H;
1. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965
2. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
Provided that if the Chief Inspector or an Inspector is of opinion that any muster roll or register
maintained in accordance with any other rules for the time being in force contains all the particulars
required for the observance of the provisions contained in Chapter VII of the Act, he may, by order in
writing, permit the maintenance of such muster roll or register in place of the registers in forms G and H ;
Provided further that in the case of a mine exempted under section 56, the Chief Inspector or an
Inspector may permit the maintenance or records of leave with wages in such manner as he may approve by
order in writing.]
(2) The register mentioned in sub- rule (1) shall be preserved for a period of two years after the last entry
in them has been made and shall not be destroyed even after the expiry of that period unless it has been
certified by an Inspector that the leave account therein has been properly transferred to the new
registers.
1[54. Information regarding leave with wages - On or before the 20th day of February every year the
owner, agent or manager of a mine shall exhibit on the notice board at the office of the mine information

regarding leave with wages due to each person employed in the calculated upto the 1st January of that year
giving the particulars specified in Form L.]
2[55. * * *]
56. Payment of leave wages due if a person dies- In the event of any person entitled to leave with wages,
shall accrue to his legal heirs or nominee as the case may be.
2[ * * *]
1. Inserted by GSR 1786 dated 30.9.1970
2. Omitted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965
59. Overtime register - The register required by sub-section (4) of section 33 shall be maintained in Form
I.
60. Extra Wages for overtime - (1) For the purpose of section 33, overtime shall be paid at the end of
each wage –period.1[* * *]
2[(2)] In calculating overtime on any day, a fraction of an hour less than 30 minutes shall be ignored and a
fraction of 30 minutes or more shall be counted as one hour.
3[(3)]In calculating the ordinary rate of wages or earnings in the case of a person paid by the month, the
daily wages shall be 1/26th of his monthly rate of wages; and in the case of any other person it shall be the
ordinary rate of his daily wages or earnings as the case may be.
61. Cases of exemption under section 56 - (1) Where an exemption is granted under section 56, the
manager shall display at the main entrance of the mine, a notice giving full details of the system established
in the mine for leave with wages and shall send a copy of it to the Inspector.
(2) No alternation shall be made in the scheme approved by the Central Government at the time o granting
exemption under section 56 without its previous sanction.
CHAPTER - IX
WELFARE AMENITIES
4[62. Provision of shelters - At every mine where more than 50 persons are ordinarily employed, there
shall be provided adequate and suitable shelters at or near loading wharves, opencast workings, workshops
and mine entrances where 25 or more persons are ordinarily employed for taking food and rest ;
Provided that any canteen maintained in accordance with these rules may be regarded as part of
the requirements of this rule.]
1. Omitted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965
2. Renumbered, ibid
3. Renumbered, ibid
4. Substituted, ibid
63. Standards of Shelters - Every shelter shall –
(a) have a floor area of not less than 14 square metres; and
1[(i) in the case of flat roof a height of not less than 2.5 metres to the lowest part of the roof; and
(ii) where the roof is a sloping one, a height of not less than 1.8 metres to the lowest part of the roof and of
not less than 2.5 metres to the highest part of the roof;]
(b) be so constructed as to afford effective protection form the weather;

(c) be constantly provided with adequate supply of cool and wholesome drinking water during the working
hours of the mine ;and
(d) be kept in a clean and tidy condition.
2[64. Provision of Canteens - (1) At every mine where in more than 250 persons are ordinarily employed,
if the Chief Inspector or an Inspector so requires, there shall be provided and maintained in or adjacent to
the precincts of the mine, a canteen for the use of all persons employed ;
Provided that where the conditions at any mine so require ,the Chief Inspector or an Inspector may
direct that other suitable arrangements approved by him for serving food, drink and other items to the
persons employed be provided and maintained in addition to the canteen required under this sub-rule.
(2) If any case, the Chief Inspector or Inspection is satisfied that no inconvenience will be caused
to the employees concerned if a single canteen is provided to serve neighbouring mines, he may
by an order in writing and subject to such conditions as he may specify therein, authorise the
owners, agents or managers of such mines to provide jointly a single canteen.]
1. Substituted by GSR 31 dated 29.12.1960
2. Substituted by GSR 1786 dated 30.9.1970
65. Standards of canteen – 1[(1)] Every canteen shall-
(a) be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Chief Inspector or an
Inspector ;
(b) be situated not less than 2[15 metres] from any latrine, urinal, boiler house, engine room, coal heap, ash
heap or heap of other material and any other source of dust or smoke;
(c) be sufficiently lighted during all hours when open for use ;
(d) be provided with a washing place for females, suitably separated or screened to secure privacy ;
(e) be white-washed or colour washed inside the rooms and passages at least once a year, and woodwork
and structural iron or steel work shall be varnished or painted at least once every three years ;
Provided that the inside walls of the kitchen shall be white washed or colour-washed once every
four months.
(f) be provided with receptacles for garbage and have drains to carry away waste water.
3[(2) The canteen or any part thereof shall not be used or allowed to be used for any other purpose which
tends to interfere with the normal or efficient functioning of the canteen.]
66. Furniture and equipment. In every canteen there shall be provided and maintained -
(a) sufficient furniture, utensils and other equipment necessary for its efficient operations ;
(b) an adequate supply of cool and wholesome drinking water ;
(c) suitable clean clothes for persons cooking and serving food, drink etc.
1. Renumbered by GSR 1786 dated 17.10.1970
2. Substituted by GSR 31 dated 29.12.1960
3. Inserted by GSR 1786 dated 30.9.1970
67. Cleanliness - (1) The canteen and its precincts shall be kept in a sanitary condition.

(2) An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided for cleansing utensils and equipment; and all
furniture, utensils and other equipment shall be kept clean and in a hygienic condition.
1[68. Maintenance of canteens and provisions of staff (1) Every canteen provided under these rules shall
be run by the owner, agent or 2[officer in-charge canteen] thereof who shall appoint supervisory and other
staff sufficient for the proper working of the canteen.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), where the workers offer to run the canteen
themselves and for this purpose organise a co-operative society, they shall be permitted to do so
with financial assistance from the management.]
3[(3) In every such canteen, such food, drink or other articles shall be made available as may be
recommended by the Canteen Managing Committee appointed under rule 69.]
69. Canteen Managing Committee - (1) The owner, agent or the officer in charge canteen shall appoint a
Canteen Managing Committee which shall be consulted from time to time, but not less than once a month,
as to the management and working of the canteen .
(2) (a) The Committee Shall consist of an equal number of members nominated by the owner, agent ‘or
2[officer in-charge canteen] and elected by the persons employed in the mine. The number of elected
members shall be on a scale of one for every 1000 persons employed, provided that the number shall
not be more than 5 or less than 2.
(b) The term of office of the elected members shall be two years commencing from the date of the last
election, no account being taken of a bye-election.
1. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965
2. Substituted by GSr 316 dated 26.4.1986
3. Inserted by GSR 1786 dated 17.10.1970
(c) The owner, agent or 1[officer-in-charge canteen] shall determine the procedure for and supervise the
elections to the Committee.
(3) The owner, agent or 1[officer-in-charge canteen] shall appoint either himself or his nominee as exofficio Chairman of the Committee; and the Chairman shall preside at every meeting of the
Committee.
(4) The proceedings of every meeting of the Committee shall be recorded in a minute book and shall be
signed by the Chairman.
70. Prices to be Charged - Food ,drink and other items served in a canteen shall be sold on a non-profit
basis and the prices charged shall be subject to the approval of the Canteen Managing Committee. A list of
approved prices shall be conspicuously displayed in the canteen in English, Hindi and in the language of
the district in which the mine is situated.
2[Explanation - In calculating the cost of food, drink and other items served in a canteen, expenditure on
the following items shall not be taken into account:
(a) the cost of utensils, including cooking vessels and utensils necessary to serve food to the
workmen ;
(b) the cost of furniture ;
(c) the cost of fuel and electricity ; and
(d) the salaries of supervisory and other staff.]
71. Accounts - Proper accounts pertaining to the canteen shall be maintained. Such accounts shall be
audited once every twelve months by a 3[chartered accountant] or auditor, and a balance sheet shall be

submitted to the Canteen Managing Committee not later then two months after the date of closing of the
accounts;
1. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
2. Inserted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965
3. Substituted by SRO 3744 dated 16.11.1957
1[Provided that the accounts pertaining to the canteen in a mine owned and worked by
Government having its own Accounts Department may be audited by such Department.]
72. Welfare Officer – 2[(1) For every mine wherein 500 or more persons are 3[ordinarily employed] the
owner, agent or manager shall appoint a suitably qualified person as Welfare Officer, and where the
number of persons so employed in a mine exceeds 2500 ,such Welfare Officer shall be assisted by one
suitably qualified additional Welfare Officer for every additional 2000 persons or part thereof employed.]
(2) No person shall act as a Welfare Officer of a mine unless he possesses -
(a) a university degree ;
(b) a degree or diploma in social science, 4[or social work] or labour welfare recognised by the
Government for the purpose of this rule, and preferably practical experience of handling labour
problems in any industrial undertaking for atleast three years; and
(c) a knowledge of the language of the district in which the mine is situated or the language
understood by the majority of persons employed in the mine;
Provided that in case of a person already in service as a Welfare Officer in a mine, the above
qualifications may, with the approval of the Chief Inspector, be relaxed.
5[2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (2), the Labour Officers included in the Central Pool
under the provisions of the Labour Officers (Central Pool) Recruitment and conditions of Service Rules,
1951, shall be eligible for appointment as a Welfare Officer in a mine.]
1. Inserted, ibid.
2. Substituted by GSR 607 dated 16.5.1959
3. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965
4. Inserted, ibid.
5. Inserted by GSR 966 dated 17.5.1968
(3) Where by reason of temporary absence, illness or any other similar cause, the Welfare Officer is unable
to perform his duties, the owner, agent or manager shall authorise in writing person whom he considers
competent, to act in his place ;
Provided that no such authority shall have effect for a period in excess of 30 days except with the
previous consent of the Chief Inspector.
1[(4) A written notice of every appointment, authorisation, discharge, dismissal, resignation or termination
of service of every Welfare Officer and of the date thereof shall be sent by the owner, agent or manager to
the Chief Inspector within seven days from the date of such appointment, authorisation. discharge,
dismissal, resignation or termination of service.]
2[(5) The post of Welfare Officer shall be advertised in a Newspaper having a wide circulation in the
State.]
73. Duties of Welfare Officer – 3[(1)] The duties of Welfare Officer shall be -

(i) to establish contacts and hold consultations with a view maintain harmonious relations between the
management and persons employed in the mine ;
(ii) to bring to the notice of the management the grievances of employees, individual as well as collective,
with a view to securing their expeditious redressal ;
(iii) to promote relations between management and employees, which will ensure productive efficiency as
well as amelioration in the working conditions, and to help workers to adjust and adapt themselves to
their working environments ;
(iv) to assist in the formation of Work and Joint Production Committees, Co-operative Societies and Safety
First and Welfare Committees and to supervise their work ;
1. Substituted by GSR 1886, dated 14.12.1965
2. Inserted by GSR 607 dated 16.5.1959
3. Renumbered, ibid
(v) to help the management in regulating the grant of leave with wages and explain to the workers the
provisions relating to leave with wages and other leave privileges and to guide the workers in the matter
of submission of applications for grant of leave for regulating authorised absence.
(vi) to advise on welfare provisions such as housing facilities, food-stuffs, social and recreational facilities,
sanitation, individual personnel problems and education of children;
(vii) to supervise welfare activities, statutory or other wise including education and training of employees;
(viii) to suggest measures which will tend to raise standard of living of workers and in general promote
their being ; and
(ix) to perform any other duty connected with the welfare of the persons employed in the mine.
1[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule(1), no Welfare Officer shall deal with any disciplinary
case again a person employed in a mine, or appear before a Conciliation Officer, Court or Tribunal on
behalf of the management of a mine against a person or persons employed in the mine, except when he is
required by the Conciliation Officer, Court or Tribunal to appear as an independent witness ;
Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall be deemed prohibit a person employed in a mine from
approaching the Welfare Officer in respect of a grievance arising out of any case of disciplinary action
against him.
2[3(3)] Every Welfare Officer shall keep a record of his day to day work and shall at the end of every year
forward to the Chief Inspector through the manager of the mine, concerned summary of the report of his
work during the year.
74. Conditions of service - (1) A Welfare Officer shall be given appropriate status corresponding to the
status of the other executive heads of the mine.
1. Inserted by GSR 1511 dated 23.9.1966
2. Added by GSR 607 dated 16.5.1959
3. Renumbered by GSR 1511, dated 23.9.1966
1[(2)The conditions of service of Welfare Officer shall be the same as of other members of the staff of
corresponding status in the mine ;
Provided that before the owner, agent or manager discharges of dismisses a Welfare Officer who
has satisfactorily completed a probationary period of six months, he shall consult the Chief Inspector or an
Inspector authorised in this behalf by the Chief Inspector.]
2[(3) A Welfare Officer shall not be given less than two hundred rupees as his basic pay per mensem.]
CHAPTER - X
3[REGISTERS, NOTICES AND RETURNS]

75. Maintenance and production of reports, Registers and other records - All reports, registers and
other records maintained in pursuance of the regulations, rules of bye-laws, unless otherwise provided
for, shall -
(a) be kept at an office or the nearest convenient building within the precincts of the mine ;
(b) be legibly entered in ink in English, Hindi or either the language understood by a majority of
the persons employed in the mine;
(c) be preserved in original for a period of one calendar year after the date of the last report or
entry ;
Provided that when the original record is lost or destroyed before the expiry of one year period , true copies
thereof, if available ,shall be preserved for the prescribed period;
(d) be produced on demand before the Chief Inspector or Inspector or any person authorised in
that behalf of the Central Government.
1. Substituted by GSR 607 dated 16.4.1959
2. Inserted, ibid
3. Substituted by GSR 1786 dated 17.10.1970
1[76. Registers of reportable and minor accidents - (1) The registers required by sub-section (1A) of
section 23 of the Act shall be maintained in Form J and a copy thereof shall be sent to the concerned
Inspector of Mines.
(2)The register, required by sub-section (3) of section 23 of the Act shall be maintained in Form
K.]
77. Register of employees - The register required by sub-section (1) of section 48 shall be maintained in
Form B. 2[keeping separate page for each person employed in the mine.]
3[77-A. Identity tokens - (1) (a) The owner, agent or manager of a mine shall issue free of cost to every
person employed in the mine, a metal token; hereinafter referred to as token, bearing a number and other
particulars by which such person may be identified;
Provided that if any other equally effective system of identification is in force in any
mine and the Chief Inspector is satisfied of the same, he may exempt such mine from the operation
of this rule subject to such conditions as he may deem fit to impose.
(b) No person employed in a mine shall enter or be permitted to enter for work in any part of a
mine unless he carries off his person the token issued to him.
(c) The token shall be of such durable and strong material as cannot be easily damaged or
defaced.
(d) The token shall be carried by an employee on his person during the time he is on duty.
(e) Where a token is damaged, defaced or lost, due to reasons other than the fault or negligence of
the employee concerned a duplicate token shall be issued forthwith to such employee free of
charge and such duplicate token shall be stamped “DUPLICATE”.
1. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
2. Inserted by GSR 656 dated 5.6.1980
3. Inserted by GSR 656 dated 9.5.1980
(f) Where a token is damaged defaced or lost due to the fault or negligence of the employee
concerned , a duplicate token stamped “DUPLICATE” shall be issued forthwith to such
employee and such employee shall be liable to pay fifty percent of the cost of the duplicate
token issued to him.

(2) The token number and other particulars by which the employee may be identified, together
with a passport size photograph, shall be entered in the register in Form B prescribed under
rule 77.]
78. Register of daily attendance - (1) The registers required by sub-section (4) of section 48 of persons
employed in the mine (a) belowground, (b) in open-cast workings and (c) aboveground shall be maintained
in Forms C,D and E respectively.
(2) The entries in the register maintained in Form C shall be made at the entrance or entrances to the mine,
at the time when a person against whose name the entry is made enters or leaves the mine.
(3) The entries in the registers maintained in Form D and E shall be made at suitable points on the
premises of the mine with reasonable despatch, at the commencement and end of the period of work.
79. Posting of abstracts, bye-laws and notices. – (1) The abstracts of the Act as given in the Fifth
Schedule shall be posted up outside the office of every mine in English, Hindi and either the language of
the district in which the mine is situated or the language understood by a majority of the persons employed
in the mine.
(2) The bye-laws shall be posted up in the manner required by sub-section (5) of section 61, in
English, Hindi and either the language of the district in which the mine is situated or the language
understood by a majority of the persons employed in the mine ;
Provided that the Chief Inspector may require the abstracts and the bye laws to be posted up in any Indian
language understood by a majority of the persons employed in the mine.
(3) Every notice required to be posted up under these rules shall be in English, Hindi and either
the language of the district in which the mine is situated or the language understood by a majority
of the persons employed in the mine.
(4) The abstracts, bye-laws and notices required to be posted up by the Act, regulations and the
rules shall be maintained in a clear and legible condition.
CHAPTER – XI
MISCELLANEOUS
80. Observance of local time –For the purpose of section 4, the local mean time that shall ordinarily be
observed in class or group of mines situated in any local area, specified in column 1 of the Sixth Schedule
shall be as specified column 2 thereof.
81. Intoxicating drugs and drinks – (1) No intoxicating drink or drug shall be carried or permitted to be
carried below ground into the workings of a mine or part.
(2) No person shall, during the course of his employment in or about a mine, possess, carry or
consume any intoxicating drink or drug or remain in a state of intoxication or drunkenness.
82. Occupational diseases – Fees for medical practitioner – A medical practitioner making an
examination in accordance with subsection (2) section 25, shall be paid as follows ;
(a) a fee not exceeding rupees sixteen for each clinical examination.
(b) A fee not exceeding rupees sixteen for each X-ray examination.

1[82A. Disability allowance and compensation for occupational diseases.- (1) The disability allowance
payable under first provision to sub-section(5) of section 9A of the Act shall be at the rate of fifty percent
of the monthly wages that he was in receipt of immediately before presenting himself for the medical
examination under sub-section (2) of section 9A of the Act.
(2) If, a person decides to leave his employment in the mine, he shall be entitled to compensation as may be
admissible under the provisions of the Workmen’s Compensation Act ,1923 (8 of 1923) as contacting of
such disease is deemed to be an injury by accident under that Act. In case the disease in not covered under
Schedule III of that Act, he shall be paid by way of disability compensation at the same rates as provided
under that Act as if it is an injury. The lump-sum compensation payable under this rule shall not be in
addition to the compensation payable under that Act.
Explanation – For the purpose of this rule, “wages” shall have the same meaning as defined in clause (m)
of section (1) of section 2 of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923(8 of 1923).
(3) The provisions of sub-rule (1) and (2) shall not operate to the prejudice to any right to which a person
employed in a mine may be entitled to under any other law or under the terms of any award, agreement or
contract of service and when such award, agreement or contract of service provides for more favourable
benefits than the disability compensation provided in sub-rule(1) and (2), such person shall be entitled to
such benefit only.]
83. Mode of payment of fees etc. – The fees or other expenses payable by the owner, agent or manager
under these rules shall be paid directly into the treasury or a branch of the State Bank of India ,and the
receipt of the treasury or bank shall be sent to the Chief Inspector along with the particulars to which the
fees or other expenses relate.
1. Inserted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
1[83A.Appeals to the Chief Inspector – Against an order made by the Inspector under any of these rules,
an appeal shall lie to the Chief Inspector who may conform or modify or cancel the order. Every such
appeal shall be preferred within 30 days of the receipt of the order by the appellant.]
CHAPTER – XII
RESCISSION AND SAVINGS
84. Rescission and Savings . (1) All rules framed by Sate Governments under section 30 of Indian Mines
Act, 1923 those contained in Chapters II, III and VI of the Mysore Gold Mines Rules, 1953, and those
issued vide the Government of India notification No. S.R.O 2403, dated the 12th July, 1954 are hereby
rescinded, but all acts done, orders issued and certificates granted or renewed under any rule so
rescinded shall, so far as they are not inconsistent with these rules, be deemed to have been
respectively done, issued, granted or renewed under these rules.
(2)The rules contained in Chapters IV and V of the Mysore Gold Mines Rules, 1953 shall continue
to apply to gold mines in the State of Mysore in addition to these rules.
1. Inserted by GSR 18 dated 24.12.1973

FORM – A
(See Rule 48(1))
Notice of commencement and end of work
Name of Mine……………..
Name of Owner……………
It is hereby notified that persons employed at this mine shall begin and end their period of work between
the hours set out below.
SN Class or kind Sex Place of work Above Set or Relay 1. Set or Relay A B C D Etc
of Ground/Opencast Number
employment working/Below ground ABC etc)
1 2 3 1[4] 2[5] 2. Shift 123 123 123 123
Period of work
3. Begins * AM/ PM
Ends * AM/PM
* Interval for rest if any.
4. Begins * AM/PM
Ends * AM/PM
5. System of change of
shifts
6. Date on which this n notice was first exhibited.
Note: * The words and letters not required shall be scored out.
Signature of Manager
Date…………………
3[FORM – B
(See Rules 48(3), 51, 77 and 77.A(2)]
(1) Serial No.
(2) Name and surname of the employee
(3) Father’s or Husband’s name
(4) Age and sex.
(5) No. and dates of the certificate, if any, held under the Mines Vocational Training Rules,1966
(6)(a) Designation of the employee.
(b) Nature of employment (whether above or below ground and if above ground
whether in opencast working or otherwise.)
(c) Whether employment is permanent or temporary or casual.
(7) Home Address of the employee, giving Village, Thana, Post office and District.
(8) Date of commencement of employment
(9) Date of first appointment, with the present owner.
(10) Date of termination or leaving of employment.
(11) In case of an adolescent, reference to certificate of fitness granted under section 40.
(12) Mark of identification on the body.
(13) Name address, relationship of person to be informed in case of accident/emergency.
(14) Token number and other particulars by which the employee may be identified.
(15) Passport size photograph of the person employed.
(16) Signature or Thumb impression of the employee.
(17) Remarks.
[Signature of Manager]
1. Omitted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
2. Renumbered, ibid
3. Substituted by GSR 656 dated 5.6.1980

FORM – C
[See Rule 48(3) and 78]
Register of persons employed below ground during the weak commencing………and ending…….19…..
Name of Mine…….Part or Section of Mine………
Name of Owner………..Hours of Shift Begins AM/PM
Ends AM/PM
SN Name and Age Class or kind Relay Serial Time should be recorded against each entry Total R
surname & of or set No. from E
of Sex employment No. Form B M
employee Register A
Day Day Day Day Day Day Day No. of No. of R
days hours K
worked worked S
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
In Out In Out In Out In Out In Out In Out In Out
Weekly Abstract Miners 1*** Others
Initial of Register Keeper including
loaders
Total no. of attendances
Total no. of absentees.
1. Omitted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986

FORM – D
[See Rule 48(3) and 78]
Register of persons employed 1[above ground] opencast working during the week commencing………and ending…….19…..
Name of Mine…….Part or Section of Mine………
Name of Owner………..Hours of Shift Begins AM/PM
Ends AM/PM
SN Name and Age Class or kind Relay Serial Time should be recorded against each entry Total R
surname & of or set No. from E
of Sex employment No. Form B M
employee Register A
Day Day Day Day Day Day Day No. of No. of R
days hours K
worked worked S
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
In Out In Out In Out In Out In Out In Out In Out
Weekly Abstract Miners 2*** Others
Initial of Register Keeper including
loaders
Total no. of attendances
Total no. of absentees.
1. Inserted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965
2. Omitted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986

FORM – E
[See Rule 48(3) and 78]
Register of persons employed above ground 1[otherwise than in opencast working] during the week commencing------ and ending …. 19
Name of Mine…….Part or Section of Mine………
Name of Owner………..Hours of Shift Begins AM/PM
Ends AM/PM
SN Name and Age Class or kind Relay Serial Time should be recorded against each entry Total R
surname & of or set No. from E
of Sex employment No. Form B M
employee Register A
Day Day Day Day Day Day Day No. of No. of R
days hours K
worked worked S
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
In Out In Out In Out In Out In Out In Out In Out
Weekly Abstract Men Women 2 ***
Initial of Register Keeper
Total no. of attendances
Total no. of absentees.
1. Inserted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965
2. Omitted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986

FORM F
[See Rule 49(4)]
Register of Compensatory Days of Rest.
Name of Mine…………………
Name of Owner……………….
Year…………………………..
SN Name & Class or kind No. of days of Dates on which weekly days of rest have not been Dates on which compensatory days of rest have No. of days Remarks
surname of compensatory allowed been allowed of
of employment rest due in the 1st 1st 1st July to 1st October 1st 1st April 1st July to 1st October compensatory
employee set or relay previous January April 30th to 31st January to 30th 30th to 31st rest due on
no. calendar year to 31st to 30th September December to 31st June September December 31st
March June March December
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14

Name of Mine………….
Owner………………….
FORM – G
(See Rules 53)
Name of Mine………………..
Name of Owner…………….
Register of Leave Account during the Calendar Year…………..
SN Name & Nature of Category of Actual Number of days worked during the year Leave period due in ensuring R
surname employment employment, year E
of mention mention Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Total Days of Arrears Total M
employee whether whether leave from A
above or monthly, entitled previous R
below weekly daily year K
ground or S
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21

FORM – H
(See Rule 53)
Register of Leave Account during the Calendar Year……………..
Name of Mine…………………………
Name of Owner………………………
SN Name Total Leave Instalment Leave Instalment Leave Instalment Arrears of R
and leave Leave E
surnam period Calculate Period Calculat Leave Date Calculated Perio Calculat Leave Date Calculate Peri Calculate Leave Date Per A M
e of due in d daily of ed leave wages of daily rate of d of ed leave wages of d daily od d leave wages of iod mo A
employ the rate of leave wages actual paym wages or leave wages actuall paym rate of of wages for actual paym unt R
ee year wages or availed for the ly ent earnings availe for the y paid ent wages or leav the period ly ent K
(from earnings period paid including d period earnings e paid S
Form including concessions including avail
G) concessio concessio ed
ns ns
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 2

Note : The date of payment of arrears of leave wages shall be entered in the Remarks column.

1[FORM – I
(See Rules 59)
Register of Overtime Wages
Name of Mine……………………
Name of Owner…………………
Month …………………..
S Name Name Class Ordi- Over- Week ending Week ending Week ending
N & sur- of or nary time Date No. No. Over- Date Date No. No. Over- Date Date No. No. Over- Date
name work kind rate rate of of of time of of of of time of of of of time of
of above of of of which over- over- ear- pay- which over- over- ear- pay- which over- over- ear- payemplo- or b/g emplo- wages wages over- time time nings ment over- time time nings ment over- time time nings ment
yee yment time hours hours time hours hours time hours hours
wor- wor- in the wor- wor- in the wor- wor- in the
ked ked week ked ked week ked ked week
on on on
that that that
date date date
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
Week ending Week ending R
Date No. No. Over- Date Date No. No. Over- Date E
of of of time of of of of time of M
which over- over- ear- pay- which over- over- ear- pay- A
over- time time nings ment over- time time nings ment R
time hours hours time hours hours K
wor- wor- in the wor- wor- in the S
ked ked week ked ked week
on on
that that
date date
22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32
1. Substituted by GSR 1786 dated 17.10.1970

1[FORM – J]
2[See Rule 76 (1)
* (Return of Reportable accident)
Name of Mine………………….
State………District……………
Owner………………………….
Mineral worked………………(Quarter ending)
1[Return of reportable accident]
Sl. Date of Date of Time of Classification Name of injured
No. entry accident accident By place By cause Brief worker
of description of
accident case of
accident
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Sl. No. Nature of Natur Parts of Date of Duration of Initials of Remarks
from employm e of body return of enforced attending
Register in ent injury injured injured absence (in medical
Form B person to days) practitioner
work
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Introduction :
Col (5) : Specify as indicated in Annexure – 1 Col (6): Specify as indicated in Annexure – II, Col. (7) :
Give brief description of the circumstances attending the accident.
Col. (11) : Specify whether simple wound laceration abrasion of fracture (only toes, fingers and thumb etc)
Col. (14) : mention the days intervening the days of occurrence and day of rejoining and not including
either the date of occurrence or rejoining.
Col. (16) : In case if an injury proves “Serious” or “Fatal” or when injured person proceeds on leave or
leaves his employment. Particulars should be entered in this column.
3[Note : Copies of entries person injured in preceding quarter(s) and who continued to absent in the quarter
should also be submitted separately]
1. Substituted by GSR 1786 dated 17.10.1970
2. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986
3. Inserted, ibid.

ANNEXURE – 1
Classification of Accident
By place of work (Column – 5)
1. Below ground :
1.1. Development face
1.2. Other Development area
1.3. Longwall face
1.4. Other Depillaring /stopping area
1.5. Tramming roadway
1.6. Other rope haulage roadways
1.7. Shafts and sinking shaft (including inclined shafts)
1.8. Inclines and Winzes
1.9. Other (Specify)
2. Opencast Workings :
2.1. Bottom Bench
2.2. Top of the Quarry
2.3. Other benches
2.4. Rope Haulage roadway
2.5. Other Transportation roadways
2.6. Other (Specify)
3. Aboveground (Excluding Opencast Workings) :
3.1. Aerial Ropeway –site
3.2. Rope Haulage Roadways
3.3. Other transportation Roadways
3.4. Railway line belonging to the mine
3.5. Site of ore handling plants (including screening plants Dressing Plants, Crushing Plants, etc)
3.6. Workshop, Power-house and other engine rooms
3.7. Depot
3.8. Other (Specify)
ANNEXURE – II
Classification of accidents by cause (Column 6)
1.Ground movements :
1.2 Fall of roof
1.3 Fall of sides (other than overhang)
1.3 Fall of overhang
1.4 Rock Burst of Bump
1.5 Air Blast
1.6 Premature collapse of workings/pillars
1.7 Subsidence
1.8 Landside
1.9 Collapse of shaft
2. Transportation Machinery (Winding in shaft)
3. Transportation Machinery (other than winding in shaft):

3.1 Aerial Ropeway
3.2 Rope Haulage
3.3 Other Rail Transportation
3.4 Mechanical conveyors
3.5 Dumpers and other heavy earth movers
3.6 Other wheeled trackless means of transportation (Trucks, lorries, etc.)
4. Machinery-other than Transportation Machinery :
4.1 Drills
4.2 Coal cutting Machinery
4.3 Coal Loading Machinery
4.4 Haulage Engine
4.5 Winding Engine
4.6Shovels, Draglines, Excavators etc.
4.7 Ore handling Plants (including crushing and screening plants)
4.8 Pumps
4.9 Other (specify)
5. Explosive
6. Electricity
7. Dust Gas and other combustible material :
7.1 Occurrence of gas
7.2 Influx of gas
7.3 Suffocation by gases
7.4 Explosion or ignition of gas/ dust etc.
7.5 Outbreak of fire or spontaneous heating
7.6 Others (Specify)
8. Falls (other than falls of ground) :
8.1 Falls of persons from heights or into depths
8.2 Falls of persons on the same level
8.3 Falls of objects other than falls of ground
8.4 Other falls (Specify)
9. Other Cause :
9.1 Irruption of water
9.2 Flying pieces
9.3 Extremity caught in between objects
9.4 Unclassified (Specify)

FORM – K
1[See Rule 76 (2)]
Return of Minor Accidents
Name of Mine……………..
State………….District…………
Owner……………………….
Mineral worked…………(Quarter ending on…)
Sl. Date of Date of Time of Classification
No. entry accident accident By place of By cause Brief description Name of
accident of case of accident injured worker
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Sl. No. from Nature of Nature Parts of body Date of return of Initial of attending Remarks
Register in employment of injury injured injured person to medical practitioner
Form B work
9 10 11 12 13 14 15
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Introduction :
Col (5) : Specify as indicated in Annexure – 1 to Form J. Col (6): Specify as indicated in Annexure – II
to From J. Col. (7) : Give brief description of the circumstances attending the accident.
Col. (11) : Specify whether simple wound laceration abrasion of fracture
Col. (15) : In case if an injury proves “reportable” “Serious” or “Fatal” or when injured person proceeds on
leave or leaves his employment. Particulars should be entered in this column.
1. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986

1[FORM – L
(See Rule 54)
Information regarding leave with Wages
Name and Serial Nature of Actual number Days of leave Days of Arrears Total Remarks
surname number employment of days worked with wages leave to of leave number of if any
of from whether below during the enjoyed during which he is carried days of
employee Register ground or above preceding year the preceding entitled over leave with
in Form ground year from the wages
“B” previous
year
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Signature
Designation: Owner/agent/manager
Mine :
Owner :
Dated ………………………….
* Inserted vide Notification No. GSR 1786, dated 30.9.1970
2{FORM M}
(See rule 29D (1)}
Notice of initial/ periodical medical examination under rule 29B
No………….. Date………………….
Sri/Srimati………………. Nature of employment**……………… Serial number from B Register**
son/daughter or/wife* of …………. Is hereby notified that he/she* should present himself/herself* for
an initial/periodical* medical examination, under rule 29B of the Mines Rules 1955, before…..(give
name of the examining authority) at ……..(give exact description of place) on *** ………… (give
date) at …….. (give time).
Shri/Shrimati*…………. May note that if he/she* fails, without reasonable cause, to submit
himself/herself* for the medical examination aforesaid he/she shall not be eligible for
appointment/continuance in employment to the mine from………………
Shri/Shrimati*……………. May further note that he/she* should bring with him/her* three unattested
photographs of himself/herself* and the previous medical certificates in Form O, if any, issued to
him/her* under rule 29 F.
Signature of manager
…………………mine
*Delete whatever is not applicable
** Necessary only in case of a person already employed in the mine.
*** In respect of the initial medical examination of a person already employed in a mine and in respect
of every periodical medical examination atleast twenty days prior notice is to be given. In respect of
the initial medical examination of a person seeking employed at a mine the period of notice may be
shorter.
Note – A copy of the notice shall be sent to the examining authority concerned. In the case of
periodical medical examination, the copy of medical certificate in Form O shall also be sent.
1. Inserted by GSR 1786 dated 17.10.1970
2. Inserted by GSR 557(E) dated 16.11.1978

1{FORM – N}
{See rule 29D (S)}
Second and final notice of initial/periodical medical examination under rule 29 B
No……… Date………….
Shri/Shrimati*…………… Nature of employment………… Serial number from Form B
Register……… Son/daughter/wife of ………. Failed to present himself/herself* for an
initial/periodical* medical examination on…… in respect of which he/she/had been given a notice on
………….
He/She* is hereby again notified that he/she* should present himself/herself* for an
initial/periodical* medical examination, under rule 29B of the Mines Rules, 1955, before……….(give
name of the examining authority) at ……(give date)** ……..at……….(give time)
Shri/Shrimati*…………, may note that if he/she* fails to submit himself/herself* for the medical
examination aforesaid, he/she* shall not be employed/retained in employment in the mine from………
Shri/Shrimati*………….., may further note that he/she* should bring with him/her* three
unmounted photographs of himself/herself* and he previous medical certificate in Form O, if any,
issued to him/her* under rule 29F.
Signature of Manager
(a) Delete whatever is not applicable.
** In respect of the initial medical examination of a person already employed in a mine and in respect
of every periodical medical examination, the second notice is to be given at lest ten days previously.
1 Inserted vide Notification No. GSR 656, dated 5.6.1980.

1(FORM – O)
(See rule 29F (2) and 29L)
Report of medical examination under rule 29B
(To be issued in triplicate)**
Certificate No…………..
Certified that Shri/Shrimati* employed as ………. In ………mine, Form B No. has been
examined for an initial/periodical medical examination. He/she* appears to be………… years of age. The
findings of the examining authority are given in the attached sheet. It is considered that
Shri/Shrimati*…………..
(a)* is medically fit for any employment in mines.
(b)* is suffering from…………. and is medically unfit for
(b) any employment in mine; or
(c) any employment below ground; or
(d) any employment or work……….
©* is suffering from………… is should get this disability* cured/controlled and should be again examined
within a period of ………..months. He/She will appear for re-examination with the result of test
of………… and the opinion of …………Specialist from………… He/She may be permitted/not*
permitted to carry on his duties during this period.
Space for affixing Passport
Size Photograph of the
Candidate. Signature of the examining authority
…………………………………………
Place : Name and designation in Block letters
Date :
* Delete whatever is not applicable.
** One copy of the certificate shall be handed over to the person concerned and another copy
shall be sent to the manager of the mine concerned by registered post; and the third copy shall
be retained by the examining authority,
Report of the examining authority
(to be filled in for every medical examination whether initial or periodical or re-examination or after
cure/control of disability).
Annexure to Certificate No…………as result of medical examination on …….
Identification Mark……………..
Left thumb impression of
The candidate
1. General development- Good/Fair/Poor
2.Height…………Cms.
3.Weight…………kg.
4Eyes :
(i)Visual acuity-Distant vision (with or without glasses).
Right eye……..Left eye…………..
(ii) any organic disease of eyes
(iii)night blindness
(iv)Colour blindness
(v)Squint
(* to be tested in special cases)
1. Inserted vide notification No.GSR 656 dated 5.6.1980

(e) Ears :
(f) Hearing : right ear………….Left ear ……………..
(g) Any organic diseases.
6.Respiratory system.
Chest measurement :
(i)after full inspiration …………cms.
(ii)After full expiration…………..cms.
7. Circulatory system:
Blood Pressure
Pulse
8. Abdomen :
Tenderness.
Liver.
Spleen.
Tumour.
9. Nervous system:
History of fits or epilepsy
Paralysis.
Mental health.
10.Locomotory system
11. Skin.
12. Hydrocele.
13. Hernia.
14. Any other abnormality
15. Urine :
Reaction.
Albumin.
Sugar.
16. Skiagram of chest.
17. Any other test considered necessary by the examining authority.
18. Any opinion of specialist considered necessary.
Signature of the examining authority
Place:

1(FORM – P)
(See rule 29F (i) and 29L)
Medical Standard of fitness for Persons Employed
1. The person should be in good mental and bodily health and free from any physical defect likely to
interfere with his efficient employment in a mine.
2. Skeletal nervous system : The limbs should be well formed and developed, and the function of all the
limbs should be within normal limits. Any deformity should be recorded. There should be no
deformity or paralysis which may interfere with his efficient employment in a mine.
3. Skin :- There should be no evidence of extensive and chronic skin disease or ulceration. In case of
infective type of skin disease, the candidate could be made fit after he has undergone a treatment. All
occupational skin diseases should be noted.
4. (a) Eye vision should be not less than the following standard:
(1) Better eye 6/12
(2) Worse eye 6/18
(b) There should be no night blindness for persons employed below ground and for persons
employed in open cast working in shifts other than in mornings shifts.
(c) A person having only one eye which functions normally should not be employed below
ground, For employment on surface the vision of such a person in the other eye should be 6/18
with or without glasses.
5. Hearing should be good, Any progressive disease affecting hearing/or occupational deafness should be
recorded.
6. Speech must be without serious impediment. Unless this is also accompanied by generalised partial
paralysis this should not be a reason for declaring unfit.
7. (a) Respiratory system should be sound and free from any chronic bronchial or laryngeal disease.
This however alone should not be reason to make unfit.
(b) 2[A full sized pestero-anterior chest radiograph (large) enough to include thoratic inlet and
both costophrenic angles obtained by an X-ray machine of atleast 300 mA Milli-Ampere)
strength shall be evaluated in the manner specified by the Chief Inspector and Lung function
tests (spirometry) to record forced vital capacity (FVC) and forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEVI) shall be made. There should not be any evidence of active pulmonary disease
if] there are evidences of active pulmonary tuberculosis, he may be permitted to work if his
sputum is negative on repeated examination and on production of a certificate that he is taking
treatment from a qualified medical practioner/hospital
8. Circulatory system – There should be no evidence of any heart or vascular disease which may interfere
with his efficient employment in a mine.
9. In case the candidate has hernia he may be declared fit after he has been successfully operated for the
same.
10. Hydrocele if present should not be large enough to impede the normal activities off the candidate. In
such cases he may be declared fit after being successfully operated.
11. The medical examination should include examination of urine and of other system for evidence of
disease. Mere presence of albumen and sugar in the urine without any gross organic disease producing
signs and symptoms should not be considered as a disability.
1. Inserted vide notification No. GSR 656 dated 5.6.1980
2. Substituted by GSR 707(E) dated 21.7.1989

1(FORM – P-I)
(See rule 29F(1) and 29L)
Medical standard of fitness for persons to be employed in mines.
1. The person should be in good mental and bodily health and free from any physical defect likely to
interfere with his efficient employment in a mine. Due allowance in the standard should be made for the
age of a candidate.
2. Locomotor system – The limbs should be well formed and developed and the function of all the limbs
should be within normal limits. Any deformity should be recorded. There should be no deformity or
paralysis which may interfere with his efficient employment in a mine. Any deformity noted should be
recorded.
3. Skin – There should be no evidence of extensive and chronic skin disease or ulceration.
4. (a) Distant vision eye with or without glasses should be not less than the following standard.
For workers employed on For workers employed
Surface and in opencast below ground
Workings
1. Better eye 6/12 6/6
2. Worse eye 6/18 6/9
(b) Night blindness should be tested in special cases only in underground workers where the examining
authority considers it necessary.
(c) A person having only one eye which functions normally should not be employed belowground. For
employment on surface the vision of such a person in the other eye should be 6/12 with or without glasses.
A person will be considered uni-ocular when there is physical loss of one eye or when there in functional
loss of vision of one eye.
(d) Colour blindness will be tested only in special cases where the job requires good colour discrimination.
Only low grade colour perceptions will be tested with Edridge Green’s lantern.
(e) There should not be squint where binocular vision is essential.
(f) There should not be any organic disease of the eye which is likely to affect the distant vision within a
period of five years.
5. Hearing should be good. Any progressive disease effecting hearing should be recorded. The candidate
should be able to hear conversational voice from a distance of 3 metres.
6. Speech must be without serious impediments.
7. (a) Respiratory system should be sound and free from any chronic laryngeal bronchial pulmonary
disease. Tuberculosis of lungs if not active should not be a disqualification.
(b) 2[A full sized pestero-anterior chest radiograph (large) enough to include thoratic inlet and both
costophrenic angles obtained by an X-ray machine of atleast 300 mA Milli-Ampere) strength shall be
evaluated in the manner specified by the Chief Inspector and Lung function tests (spirometry) to record
forced vital capacity (FVC) and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEVI) shall be made. There
should not be any evidence of active pulmonary disease if] there are evidences of active pulmonary
tuberculosis, he may be permitted to work if his sputum is negative on repeated examination and on
production of a certificate that he is taking treatment from a qualified medical practioner/hospital
1. Substituted by GSR 707(E) dated 21.7.1989
2. Substituted, ibid

8.Circulatory system :- There should be no evidence of cardiac or vascular disease which may interfere
with his efficient employment in a mine.
9. There should not be any evidence of disease of abdominal organs which is likely to affect his efficient
discharge of duty in a mine.
10. In case the candidate has hernia, he may be declared fit after he has been successfully operated for the
same.
11. Hydrocele if present should not be large enough to impede the normal activities of the person. If it is
large enough he may be declared fit after being successfully operated.
12. The nervous system should be sound. Persons with history of epilepsy or any other type of organic or
historical fits should not be declared fit for employment in a mine.
13. The medical examination should include examination of urine. Mere presence of albumen and sugar in
the urine without any gross organic disease producing signs and symptoms should not be a disability.
14. Skiagram of the chest should also he obtained. If it is necessary the medical officer may direct the
candidate to obtain the result of special tests or/and the opinion of a specialist from recognised
institution/hospital.
(FORM – Q)
(See rule 29J(2) 9 (a))
Notice of medical re-examination by Appellate Medical Board
No……….. Date………………..
MEMORANDUM
SHRI/Shrimati*………..Nature of employment……………serial number from Form B Register…………
son/daughter/wife* of ………….., who has appealed for a re-examination against the findings of a medical
examination under rule 29B of Mines Rules, 1955 that he/she is unfit for :
a. * Any employment in mines.
b. * Any employment below………. Ground.
c. * Any employment on work………..(Specify in detail) is hereby notified that he/she should
present himself/herself* for a medical re-examination by the Appellate Medical Board at
………. (give exact description of place) on**………….(give date) at ……….(Give
time).
Shri/Shrimati*…….may note that if he/she* fails without reasonable cause, to submit
himself/herself* for the medical re-examination aforesaid he/she* shall not be retained in
employment in the mine.
Signature of manager
……………………mine.
*Delete whatever is not applicable
**15 days, prior notice is to be given to a medical re-examination by the Appellate Medical Board.

(FORM – R)
(See rule 29J(2) (b) )
Second and final notice of medical re-examination by Appellate
Medical Board
No………….. Date……………19
MEMORANDUM
SHRI/Shrimati*………..Nature of employment……………serial number from Form B Register…………
son/daughter/wife* of ………….., failed to present himself/herself* for medical re-examination on …..in
respect of which he/she* had been given a notice on …………
He/She* is hereby again notified that he/she* should present himself/herself* for a medical re-examination
by the Appellate Medical Board at ……..(give exact description of place) on**……….(give date) at
…………(give time).
Shri/Shrimati*…..may note that if he/she* fails to submit himself/herself* for the medical re-examination
aforesaid, he/she* shall not be retained in employment in the mine.
Signature of Manager
……………….. mine.
* Delete whatever is not applicable.
**15 days’ prior notice is to be given of medical re-examination by the Appellate Medical Board.
(FORM – S)
(See rule 29L)
Report of medical re-examination by Appellate Medical Board
(To be issued in triplicate)**
We do hereby certify that we have examined Shri/Shrimati* ……….. Nature of
employment…….., Serial Number from Form B Register………….. of ….. mine, who has been
declared medically unfit for.
5. * any employment in mine.
6. * any employment belowground.
7. * any employment in work……….
(Specify in details)
as a result of a medical examination under rule 29B. Our Report is given overleaf.

We consider that –
1. He/She* is medically fit for any employment in mine.
2. He/She* is suffering from……….. and is medically unfit for
(a) * any employment in mine.
(b) * any employment belowground.
(c) * any employment in work……….
________________________________
(Specify in details)
3. He/She is suffering from…..and should get this disability/cured/controlled* and should be again
examined within a period of ……………months. He will appear for re-examination within a period
of…………months. He will appear for re-examination with the result of test of………* and opinion of
………specialist from…………He may be permitted/not permitted* to carry on his duties during this
period.
Signature of members of
Appellate Medical Board
1…………………(Convenor)
2………….. 3……………
* Delete whichever is not applicable
**One copy of the certificate shall be handed over to the person concerned and another copy shall be sent to the manager of the mine
concerned by registered post, and the third copy shall be retained by the Convener of the Appellate Medical Board.
REPORT OF THE APPLELLATE MEDICAL BOARD
Annexure to certificate No………….as result of Medical examination identification mark :
On……………. Left thumb impression
Of the candidate
1. General development. Good/Fair/Poor
2. Height……….cms. 3. Weight……….kg.
4. (i) Eyes………visual acuity Distant vision(with or without glasses)
(ii) any organic disease of eyes.
*(iii) night blindness Right eye………Left eye………….
*(iv) Colour blindness……….(v) Squint…………………..
(* to be tested in special cases)
5. Ears :
(i) Hearing………(ii) any organic disease
6. Respiratory system :
Chest measurement
8. after full inspiration …….cms (ii) after full expiration……
7. Circulatory system :
Blood pressure…………. Pulse…………..
8. Abdomen :
Tenderness……..Liver……..Spleen…………Tumour………..
9. Nervous system :
History of fits or epilepsy…..Paralysis……..Mental health………

10. Locomotion system :
11. Skin :
12. Hernia :
13.Hydrocele :
14.Any other abnormality :
Urine: Reaction…….. Albumin……… Sugar………..
15.Skiagram of chest :
16.Any other test considered necessary by the examining authority.
17.Any opinion of specialist considered necessary.
Place : Signature of the Appellate Medical Board
(FORM – T)
(See rule 29-P(i))
Annual Return for the year ending on the 31st December
1. Name of mines………………
2. Postal address of Mines……………
3. Date of opening ………………..
4. Date of closing (if closed)………….
5. Situation of Mine (District/State)…………..
6. Name of Owner………..Postal address of owner…………
7. Number of persons required to be medically examined……….
9. Number of persons medically examined……………
10. Number of persons declared medically unfit…………
11. Categorisation of the persons declared unfit………….
Certified that the information given above is correct to the best of my knowledge.
Date……………… Signature……………..
(No. S. 650/2/1/72-M.L.)
1(FORM – U)
(See rule 29R and S)
Name of Mine………Owner…………Manager……………..Place/installation inspected…………………..
Inspected by ………………on ……………Accompanied by………………
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Observations Remedial Action taken Date on Remarks
Measures for remedial which action if any
Suggested measures taken
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Signature of Workmen’s Signature of Manager
Inspector with date
Signature of mine official
Accompanying the workMen’s Inspector
Date……..Designation
1. Inserted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986